Sandalwood is a class of woods from trees in the genus Santalum. The woods are heavy, yellow, and fine-grained, and, unlike many other aromatic woods, they retain their fragrance for decades. Sandalwood oil is extracted from the woods. Sandalwood is often cited as one of the most expensive woods in the world. Both the wood and the oil produce a distinctive fragrance that has been highly valued for centuries. Consequently, some species of these slow-growing trees have suffered over-harvesting in the past.

Nomenclature
The nomenclature and the taxonomy of the genus are derived from this species' historical and widespread use. Etymologically it is ultimately derived from Sanskrit चन्दन Chandana (čandana), meaning "wood for burning incense" and related to candrah, "shining, glowing" and the Latin candere, to shine or glow. It arrived in English via Late Greek, Medieval Latin and Old French in the 14th or 15th century.[1]

True sandalwoods
Sandalwoods are medium-sized hemiparasitic trees, and part of the same botanical family as European mistletoe. Sandalwood is indigenous to the tropical belt of the peninsular India, Malay Archipelago and northern Australia.[2][3] The main distribution is in the drier tropical regions of India and the Indonesian islands of Timor and Sumba.[4] It spread to other regions through the incense trade route by the vast Indian and Arab mercantile networks and the Chinese maritime trade routes until the sixteenth century CE.[5] The sandalwood of peninsular India and the Malay Archipelago supported most consumption in East Asia and West Asia during the time of the incense trade route[6][7] before the commercialization of Australian sandalwood (Santalum spicatum) in sandalwood plantations in Australia and China, although sandalwood album (Santalum album) is still considered to have the best and original quality in terms of religion and alternative medicine. Santalum spicatum is marketed as the notable members of this group today by merchants because of its stable sources; others in the genus also have fragrant wood. These are found in India, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Australia, Indonesia, Hawaii, and other Pacific Islands,

Santalum album is a threatened species native to dry tropical regions of Indonesia (Java and the Lesser Sunda Islands), the Philippines, and Western Australia.[8] It was one of the plants exploited by Austronesian arboriculture and it was introduced by Austronesian sailors to East Asia, Mainland Southeast Asia and South Asia during the ancient spice trade, becoming naturalized in South India by at least 1300 BCE.[9][10] In India, the principal sandal tracts are most parts of Karnataka and adjoining districts of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh.[11] Although sandalwood trees in India, Pakistan, and Nepal are government-owned and their harvest is controlled, many trees are illegally cut down. Sandalwood oil prices had risen to $3000 per liter by 2017.[12]
Santalum ellipticum, S. freycinetianum, and S. paniculatum, the Hawaiian sandalwood (ʻiliahi), were also used and considered high quality. These three species were exploited between 1790 and 1825 before the supply of trees ran out (a fourth species, S. haleakalae, occurs only in subalpine areas and was never exported). Although S. freycinetianum and S. paniculatum are relatively common today, they have not regained their former abundance or size, and S. ellipticum remains rare.[13][14]
Santalum yasi, a sandalwood from Fiji and Tonga.
Santalum spicatum is used by aromatherapists and perfumers. The oil concentration differs considerably from other Santalum species. In the 1840s, sandalwood was Western Australia's biggest export earner. Oil was distilled for the first time in 1875, and by the turn of the 20th century, production of Australian sandalwood oil was intermittent. However, in the late 1990s, Western Australian sandalwood oil enjoyed a revival and by 2009 had peaked at more than 20,000 kg (44,000 lb) per year – much of which went to the fragrance industries in Europe. Although overall production has decreased, by 2011, a significant percentage of its production was heading to the chewing tobacco industry in India alongside Indian sandalwood – the chewing tobacco market being the largest market for both oils in 2012.

Other species: Commercially, various other species, not belonging to Santalum species, are also used as sandalwood.


Production
Producing commercially valuable sandalwood with high levels of fragrance oils requires Indian sandalwood (S. album) trees to be a minimum of 15 years old – the yield, quality and volume are still to be clearly understood. Yield of oil tends to vary depending on the age and location of the tree; usually, the older trees yield the highest oil content and quality. India continues to produce a superior quality of Santalum Album, with FP Aromatics being the largest exporter.[15] Australia is the largest producer of S. album, with the majority grown around Kununurra, in the far north of the state by Quintis (formerly Tropical Forestry Services), which in 2017 controlled around 80% of the world's supply of Indian sandalwood,[16] and Santanol.[17] India used to be the world's biggest producer, but it has been overtaken by Australia in the 21st century. Over-exploitation is partly to blame for the decline. [18][19] However, ethical plantations in India are on the rise, and India is expected to increase its supply manyfold by 2030, owing to favourable weather conditions and competitive pricing.
Australian sandalwood (S. spicatum) is grown in commercial plantations throughout the wheatbelt of Western Australia, where it has been an important part of the economy since colonial times. As of 2020 WA has the largest plantation resource in the world.[20]
Sandalwood is expensive compared to other types of woods. To maximize profit, sandalwood is harvested by removing the entire tree instead of felling at the trunk near ground level. This way wood from the stump and root, which possesses high levels of sandalwood oil, can also be processed and sold.[21]
Australian sandalwood is mostly harvested and sold in log form, graded for heartwood content. The species is unique in that the white sapwood does not require removal before distilling the oil. The logs are either processed to distill the essential oil, or made into powders for making incense. Indian sandalwood, used mainly for oil extraction, does require removal of the sapwood prior to distillation. As of 2020, Australian Sandalwood oil sells for around US$1,500 per 1 kilogram (2.2 lb), while Indian Sandalwood oil, due to its higher alpha santalol content, is priced at about US$2,500 per kg.[20]
Sandalwood is often cited as one of the most expensive woods in the world, along with African blackwood, pink ivory, agarwood and ebony.[22][23]
Sandalwood has historically been an important tree in the development of the political economy of the Pacific. Prior to colonization in the region, the sandalwood tree was a marker of status, rank and beauty. It then became an important part of the Pacific trade during the colonial period, as it was one of the few resources the West was able to successfully trade with Chinese merchants. This western trade began to put pressure on the production of sandalwood in the region.[24]
Tonga, a Polynesian kingdom in the Oceania region, saw a severe depletion of its sandalwood tree (locally known as “‘ahi”) due a disruption of the social hierarchy, known as “fahu”, which led to heightened local competition and eventually an over harvest. Nearly all of the sandalwood resources were depleted over the span of two years.[25]
Tongan people have a unique social dynamic referred to as “fahu.” On the one hand, the kinship system of fahu is able to ensure biodiversity and sustainability in contemporary Tonga. But on the other hand, a principal factor in the over harvest of the ‘ahi tree was the result of the defensive actions of farmers defying fahu customs. As sandalwood became valuable in the market, lower-ranking family members began to harvest the trees without permission, encouraging many farmers to harvest their trees defensively and thus leading to over harvest.[26]
In 2007, Mike Evans published a scholarly report on Tongan sandalwood overharvest and the socio-environmental implications of resource commodification and privatized land tenure. Evan’s concluded that “whatever the short-term ecological benefits of enforcing privatized land tenure, because private property not only fragments social ties by allowing an individual to deny others, it has the potential to fragment the regional ecology as well.”[27]


Uses
Fragrance

Sandalwood oil has a distinctive soft, warm, smooth, creamy, and milky precious-wood scent. Its quality and scent profile is greatly influenced by the age of the tree, location and the skill of the distiller. It imparts a long-lasting, woody base to perfumes from the oriental, woody, fougère, and chypre families, as well as a fixative to floral and citrus fragrances. When used in smaller proportions in a perfume, it acts as a fixative, enhancing the longevity of other, more volatile, materials in the composite. Sandalwood is also a key ingredient in the "floriental" (floral-ambery) fragrance family – when combined with white florals such as jasmine, ylang ylang, gardenia, plumeria, orange blossom, tuberose, lily of the valley, etc. Its also acts as a versatile base that blends well with other woody scents like patchouli and cedar.
Sandalwood oil in India is widely used in the cosmetic industry. The main source of true sandalwood, S. album, is a protected species, and demand for it cannot be met. Many species of plants are traded as "sandalwood". The genus Santalum has more than 19 species. Traders often accept oil from closely related species, as well as from unrelated plants such as West Indian sandalwood (Amyris balsamifera) in the family Rutaceae or bastard sandalwood (Myoporum sandwicense, Myoporaceae). However, most woods from these alternative sources lose their aroma within a few months or years.
Isobornyl cyclohexanol is a synthetic fragrance chemical produced as an alternative to the natural product.
Sandalwood's main components are the two isomers of santalol (about 75%). It is used in aromatherapy, in scented candles and to prepare soaps.[28]

Idols/sculptures
Sandalwood lends itself well to carving and has thus, traditionally, been a wood of choice for statues and sculptures of Hindu gods.

Technology
Due to its low fluorescence and optimal refractive index, sandalwood oil is often employed as an immersion oil within ultraviolet and fluorescence microscopy.

Food
Aboriginal Australians eat the seed kernels, nuts, and fruit of local sandalwoods, such as the quandong (S. acuminatum).[29] Early Europeans in Australia used quandong in cooking damper by infusing it with its leaves, and in making jams, pies, and chutneys from the fruit.[29] In Scandinavia, pulverised bark from red sandalwood (Pterocarpus soyauxii) is used - with other tropical spices - when marinating anchovies and some types of pickled herring such as matjes, sprat, and certain types of traditional spegesild, inducing a reddish colour and slightly perfumed flavour.
Present-day chefs have begun experimenting in using the nut as a substitute for macadamia nuts or a bush food substitute for almonds, hazelnuts, and others in Southeast Asian-styled cuisine.[33] The oil is also used as a flavour component in different food items, including candy, ice cream, baked food, puddings, alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, and gelatin. The flavouring is used at levels below 10 ppm, the highest possible level for use in food products being 90 ppm.

Distillation
Oil is extracted from Sandalwood through distillation. Many different methods are used, including steam distillation, water distillation, CO2 extraction, and solvent extractions. Steam distillation is the most common method used by sandalwood companies. It occurs in a four-step process, incorporating boiling, steaming, condensation, and separation. Water is heated to high temperatures (60–100 °C or 140–212 °F) and is then passed through the wood. The oil is very tightly bound within the cellular structure of the wood, but can be released by the high heat of the steam. The mixture of steam and oil is then cooled and separated so that the essential oil can be collected. This process is much longer than any other essential oil's distillation, taking 14 to 36 hours to complete, but generally produces much higher quality oil. Water, or hydro, distillation is the more traditional method of sandalwood extraction which involves soaking the wood in water and then boiling it until the oil is released. This method is not used as much anymore because of the high costs and time associated with heating large quantities of water.


Religion
Hinduism

Sandalwood is considered sacred in the Hindu Ayurveda and is known in Sanskrit as chandana.[36] The wood is used for worshipping the deities, and it is said that Lakshmi (Sri), the goddess of well-being, lives in the sandalwood tree; therefore, it is also known as Srigandha.
Sandalwood paste is prepared by grinding a piece of dry sandalwood into powder, against a stone slab. With the gradual addition of water, a thick paste forms, (called kalabham "കളഭം" in Malayalam language and gandha ಗಂಧ in Kannada) and it is mixed with saffron or other such pigments to make chandanam. Chandanam, further mixed with herbs, perfumes, pigments, and some other compounds, results in javadhu. Kalabham, chandanam, and javadhu are dried and used as kalabham powder, chandanam powder, and javadhu powder, respectively. Chandanam powder is very popular in India and is also used in Nepal.
In Tirupati, after religious tonsure, sandalwood paste is applied to protect the skin. In Hinduism and Ayurveda, sandalwood is thought to bring one closer to the divine. Thus, it is one of the most used holy elements in Hindu and Vedic societies.[37][38] This paste is integral to rituals and ceremonies, for making religious utensils, for decorating sacred images, and it is believed to calm the mind during meditation and prayer. It is also distributed to devotees, who apply it to their foreheads or necks and chests.[39] Sandalwood paste is used for most pujas both in temples and private households.

Jainism
Mahamastakabhisheka at Shravanabelagola
Sandalwood use is an integral part of the daily practices of Jainism. Sandalwood paste mixed with saffron is used to worship the Tirthankaras of Jainism. Sandalwood powder is showered as blessings by Jain monks and nuns (sadhus and sadhvis) onto their disciples and followers. Sandalwood garlands are used to dress the body during Jain cremation ceremonies. During the festival of Mahamastakabhisheka that is held once in every 12 years, the Gommateshwara statue is bathed and anointed with libations such as milk, sugarcane juice, and saffron paste, and sprinkled with powders of sandalwood, turmeric, and vermilion.[40]

Buddhism
Sandalwood is mentioned in various suttas of the Pāli Canon.[41] In some Buddhist traditions, sandalwood is considered to be of the padma (lotus) group and attributed to Amitabha Buddha. Sandalwood scent is believed by some to transform one's desires and maintain a person's alertness while in meditation.[42] It is also one of the most popular scents used when offering incense to the Buddha and the guru.

Sufism
In the Indian variants of Sufism, sandalwood paste is applied on a revered Sufi's grave by the disciples as a mark of devotion. The tradition is practiced particularly by devotees in the Indian Subcontinent. In Tamil culture, irrespective of one's religious identity, sandalwood paste or powder is applied to the graves of Sufi saints as a mark of devotion and respect.[43][44][45]

East Asian religions
In East Asia, sandalwood is the most commonly used incense material by the Chinese, Korean and Japanese in worship and various ceremonies. Some Taoist sects, following the Ming Dynasty Taoist Manual, avoid the use of sandalwood (as well as benzoin resin and frankincense) as incense in worship.[46] In Korean Shamanism, sandalwood is considered the Tree of Life. It was transmitted to China, the Korean Peninsula, and Japan during the eastward expansion of Buddhism.[5]: 3 

Zoroastrianism
Zoroastrians offer sandalwood twigs to the afarganyu, the urn in which the fire is kept at the fire temple (called agiyari in Gujarati and dar-e mehr in Persian), to keep the fire burning during religious ceremonies. After the firekeeping priests complete the ceremony, attendees are allowed to come up to the afarganyu and place their own pieces of sandalwood into the fire. Fire has been a sacred symbol in the Zoroastrian religion since ancient times and it is considered very important to keep the fires in the temples constantly burning. Because of its high sensitivity to fire, sandalwood works very well for this. Also, the wood has been accepted by the Yasna and Yashts (sacred texts) as an appropriate fuel for the fire. It is offered to all of the three grades of fire in the fire temple, including the Atash Dadgahs. Sandalwood is not offered to the divo, a smaller lamp that is kept in the homes of Zoroastrians. Often, money is offered to the mobad (priest) as payment, along with sandalwood. Sandalwood is called sukhad in the Zoroastrian community. The sandalwood in the fire temple is often more expensive to buy than at a Zoroastrian store. It is often a source of income for the fire temple.



Pterocarpus santalinus, with the common names red sanders, red saunders, Yerra Chandanam, Chenchandanam, red sandalwood, Rakta Chandana, and rakto chandon, is a species of Pterocarpus endemic to the southern Eastern Ghats mountain range of South India.[1][3] This tree is valued for the rich red colour of its wood, and in recent years there has been a marked uptick in the use of red sandalwood as a component of incense, especially in the west. The tree is not to be confused with the aromatic Santalum sandalwood trees that grow natively in Southern India.

Description
Pterocarpus santalinus is a light-demanding small tree, growing to 8 metres (26 ft) tall with a trunk 50–150 cm diameter. It is fast-growing when young, reaching 5 metres (16 ft) tall in three years, even on degraded soils. It is not frost tolerant, being killed by temperatures of −1 °C.
The leaves are alternate, 3–9 cm long, trifoliate with three leaflets.
The flowers are produced in short racemes. The fruit is a pod 6–9 cm long containing one or two seeds.[4][5]

Uses
Timber

The wood has historically been valued in China, particularly during the Qing dynasty periods, and is referred to in Chinese as zitan (紫檀) and spelt tzu-t'an by earlier western authors such as Gustav Ecke, who introduced classical Chinese hardwood furniture to the west.[6] An exquisite chair made of red sandalwood can be seen today in China's Forbidden City in Beijing, inside the Hall of Supreme Harmony, and once used by the emperors of the Qing dynasty.
Due to its slow growth and rarity, furniture made from zitan is difficult to find and can be expensive.[7] It has been one of the most prized woods for millennia.
In India red sandalwood is one main and lucrative market for smugglers, as a high price is paid for this wood in China. Since the exporting of sandalwood is illegal in India, the underground market is growing and there are a number of arrests every year of those trying to smuggle this wood to China.
The other form of zitan is from the species Dalbergia louvelii, Dalbergia maritima, and Dalbergia normandii, all similar species named in trade as bois de rose or violet rosewood which when cut are bright crimson purple changing to dark purple again. It has a fragrant scent when worked.[6]

Shamisen
Red sandalwood has been used for making the bridge and also the neck of the Japanese musical instrument shamisen.[8] The heartwood is preferred for this purpose.

Medicinal values
Pterocarpus santalinus is used in traditional herbal medicine as an antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, anthelmintic, tonic, hemorrhage, dysentery, aphrodisiac, anti-hyperglycaemic and diaphoretic.[9][10]

Grading of red sandalwood
Red sandalwood grown on the shale subsoils, at altitudes around 750 metres (2,460 ft), and in semi-arid climatic conditions gives a distinctive wavy grain margin. Lumber pieces with the wavy grain margin are graded as "A" grade. Red sandalwood with wavy grain margins sells at higher prices than the standard wood.

Conservation status
Pterocarpus santalinus was listed as an Endangered species by the IUCN, because of overexploitation for its timber in South India; however, it was later reclassified to Near Threatened in 2018, as the scale of this loss is not properly known.[11] It is also listed in the appendix II of the CITES, which means that a certificate is required in order to export it, that should only be granted if the trade is not detrimental to the survival of the species.


What is red sandalwood?
The Pterocarpus santalinus, with the common names red sanders, red saunders, Yerra Chandanam and many others is a sandalwood tree which is red in colour and has so many good benefits: From making antique goods, medicines and majorly beauty projects. 
The slow-growing tree has gorgeous redwood. Its a rare wood that grows only in the Seshachalam Hills of Andhra Pradesh


Different from regular sandals?
Yes! Red sandalwood is totally different from the regular sandal which we use in our homes. The regular sandalwood is very aromatic, although, the red sandalwood's bark does not have any smell and unlike sandalwood, the bark is red in colour.

Where it is found?
Red Sandalwood is native and endemic to India and can only be found in the Seshachalam hills of the southern Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It was listed as an Endangered species by the IUCN, because of overexploitation for its timber in South India. 

Benefits from the red sandalwood?
While it is not widely used in India that much, the timber is highly demanded internationally, especially in East Asian countries. It is used for carvings, furniture, and another thing. 
Red sandalwood has historically been valued in China, particularly during the Qing Dynasty periods and it is also used for making the bridge and also the neck of the Japanese musical instrument Shamisen
It is used in traditional herbal medicine and is used in diseases like cough, vomiting, fever, hyperdipsia, helminthiasis etc and is also used for skin care and cosmetic purposes. 

What is Price?
The wood is extremely rare all over the world and is highly valued in South East Asia and in the Gulf nations. According to media reports, the cost of 1 kg is said to be in a range from Rs 90 thousand to Rs 1.5 lakh rupees and is sold for millions in the international market, naturally, the smuggling will be high.
The reason for the high cost of red sandals wood is that the supply of red sandalwood is much less than the white ones . the supply is less because of the slow growth rate of red sandalwood trees as they takes around 30 years to fully develop.



Sandalwood it very expensive and it is used for making various stuffs. People get killed in the process sometimes.
Imagine you have 10 sandal wood trees ready for harvest. There are bunch of tree thieves ready to steal it from you if you dont have proper protection to safeguard it. They start chopping or sawing it to transport and you see them doing it.. You go there to stop them scare them and what not…eventually either they escape or you get killed and your property is violated and theft has been done. This is what happens in India.
If one really wants to do business with sandal wood. One must take permission to grow and sell it to the Government itself after harvest. I don't know why but you have to sell it to government. Either they are greedy or some other reason which will be stupid 90% of the time. Remember government buys for lower price…. If you make a contact with private buyer you end up being rich in no time and as a farmer government cant tax you for it. So government being A’holes make these kinds of crappy rules in india to make people suffer and earn them more profit.
India is very far away to be completely calling itself Developed Country due to this stupid rules which are ancient and unhelpful to common man.

Government is providing the security and a chip to be installed on every sandalwood trees this making it very secure from tree thieves and for accountability.
Government does allow farmers who grow them to be sold for whomever they feel is profitable according to the rules.

It is not illegal to grow sandalwood trees in India. Infact, the forest department distributes the sandalwood saplings as part of social forestry program.
When it comes to cutting down the tree in your land, it's another story. You just can't. If you have a tree, you inform the forest department, they come and survey the tree, cut it down and take it and you will be paid the price minus the cost of taking the tree away.
It's illegal to cut because sandalwood trees takes a long time to mature. The ones we cut more should be at least a hundred years plus old. So is the case with rosewood. It takes almost twice the time. With the demand for sandalwood tree products- oil and word, if the cutting is allowed freely, there won't be many trees left in no time. So the felling is controlled strictly.
The flip side of the issue is people do not want to keep a sandalwood tree and they won't hesitate to destroy one if they seeme it growing in their fields.


In India, sandalwood is protected under the Forest Act due to its high value and threatened status in the wild. Strict regulations aim to prevent illegal harvesting and ensure sustainable management of sandalwood resources, limiting its cultivation to authorized entities under controlled conditions.
In Karnataka, people can just plant saplings without any permission from anybody. however, to cut and transport sandalwood, we need permission from state forest department. Government run forestry nurseries are giving out millions of saplings every rainy season at very subsidised price to farmers. Mysore soaps and detergents company is making agreements with farmers to purchase ripe trees after 13 years of planting at the market price prevailing at that time.

The Indian Sandalwood tree popular as Snatalaum Album is probably the most expensive wood on the planet. The reason is the cosmetic and therapeutic value of this plant.
There is a major international demand for it due to its fragrant heartwood that is priced at more than Rs. 10,000 per kg. These trees thrive very well in South Indian soil, particularly in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, and have a requirement of a very little amount of water.
Fruiting happens all through the year in this tree and its tiny fruits allure birds for instance cuckoos and parrots. And when we ultimately cut the trees for harvesting of wood during their lifetime, like any other tree they also function as a carbon sink and are used to generate oxygen.
Until 2002, the growing of Sandalwood by individuals was banned. Nowadays, we can do Chandan Tree Farming, but it is still illegal to do cutting and harvesting of the sandalwood. Along with this, it is also illegal to use sandalwood or sell it in the open market.
There is a requirement for permission for cutting and harvesting sandalwood from the state forest department. The state forest department will send its officials for cutting trees and purchasing the sandalwood.

The plantation and open sale of sandalwood in India are banned primarily due to the following reasons:

Overexploitation: Sandalwood, particularly the species Santalum album, has been overharvested due to its high demand in the fragrance and cosmetic industries, leading to a significant decline in its population.
Conservation Status: Sandalwood is classified as a vulnerable species in India. The government has implemented regulations to protect it from further depletion and to ensure its sustainable use.
Legal Framework: The Indian Forest Act of 1927 and various state laws regulate the cultivation and sale of sandalwood. These laws require a permit for harvesting and selling sandalwood, aiming to prevent illegal logging and trade.
Economic Reasons: The high price of sandalwood has led to illegal activities, including poaching and smuggling. By banning open sale, the government aims to control the market and reduce illegal trade.
Cultural Significance: Sandalwood holds cultural and religious significance in India, used in rituals and traditional medicine. Protecting it aligns with preserving cultural heritage.
Overall, the ban is a measure to conserve the sandalwood population, prevent illegal trade, and promote sustainable practices.



Red sanders smuggling is a major issue in India, with the wood being illegally logged and exported to countries like China, Hong Kong, Singapore, and the United States. The wood is in high demand due to its use in textiles, medicine, and food, and its scarcity compared to white sandalwood. 
Here are some recent examples of red sanders smuggling:
March 2022
The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) seized 12.20 metric tonnes of red sanders from a container in Krishnapatnam, which was being smuggled to Malaysia. 
November 2021
The DRI seized 9.98 metric tonnes of red sanders from an export container in ICD Piyala, Haryana, which was being smuggled as "Iron & Brass Builder Hardware items". 
December 2021
The DRI seized 9.42 metric tonnes of red sanders from ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi, which was being smuggled as "cast iron pipes". 
Some say that the red sanders smuggling problem has worsened in recent years. Some of the reasons for this include:
A lack of cooperation between the forest and police departments
A lack of scientific surveillance at check posts
A lack of inter-state police and forest official meetings
Allegations of political leaders being involved in smuggling 


About 20,000 tonnes of Red Sanders were smuggled from India between 2016 and 2020
Heartwood of Red Sanders is in demand in the domestic and international markets for making furniture, handicrafts and musical instruments.


The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) recorded 28 incidents of confiscation and seizure of more than 19,049 tonnes of Red Sanders logs. These had been exported from India between 2016 and 2020 after being illegally extracted from the wild, according to a new factsheet
Red Sanders (Pterocarpus santalinus), also called Red Sandalwood, is a species found in the southern tropical dry deciduous forest of Andhra Pradesh (AP). The tree reaches an average height of 10 to 15 metres
With 53.3 per cent of logs being shipped to China, it is the biggest importer of these illegally harvested logs of Red Sanders, noted the document released by TRAFFIC and WWF-India on February 2, 2023
Also read: Red Sanders falls back in IUCN’s ‘endangered’ categor
The species is listed as ‘Endangered’ in the International Union for Conservation of Nature and falls in Appendix II of CITES. In India, it has been enlisted under Schedule IV of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
The heartwood of Red Sanders is in demand in the domestic and international markets for making furniture, handicrafts and musical instruments in China and Japan. The red dye obtained from the wood is used as a colouring agent in the textiles, medicine and food industries
“Red Sanders is reported to be one of India’s most exploited tree species and is under severe pressure from illegal logging and harvesting. Rampant illegal logging has been reported across its range state,” said Merwyn Fernandes, coordinator of TRAFFIC’s India Office
Under the foreign trade policy of India, the import of Red Sanders is prohibited, while export is restricted
China remains the largest importer with more than 13,618 tonnes of the products, followed by Hong Kong at 5,215 tonnes and Singapore at 216 tonnes, according to the factsheet.
Rampant illegal logging and smuggling of trees have been reported in Chittoor, YSR Kadappa, Nellore and Kurnool districts, according to the AP Forest Department
To curb this illegal logging of the endangered species, the AP Forest Department formed a Red Sanders Anti-Smuggling Task Force in 2014, which has made several seizures of the wood
Dedicated posts in the Police Department, District Special Parties, Andhra Pradesh Special Police Platoons and Forest Department were sanctioned along with other administrative and ministerial posts to control the smuggling of Red Sanders. Since its inception, the Red Sanders Anti-Smuggling Task Force has made numerous seizures of Red Sanders in the state.


Seshachalam Hills, one of India’s richest biospheres, has become the hot spot of red sanders smuggling and allied crimes costing many police, forest officials and mafia members their lives apart from threatening the survival of the endangered tree species. Over the years, despite changes in the governments and people in power, the smuggling of the precious wood continues unabated, indicating that the problem is of a socio-economic-political nature, writes K. Umashhankar
A batch of red sanders logs freshly cut and dressed from Seshachalam hills. The wood contains a compound called Santalin which gives it the rich red colour. Seshachalam Hills of the Eastern Ghats is one of the few places on earth where the trees grow.
Seshachalam Hills, one of India’s richest biospheres which form the tip of the Eastern Ghats in Andhra Pradesh is considered a floristic hotspot for it houses many endemic and rare species including five gecko species, 12 species of lizards and 22 species of snakes.

However, it is red sanders (Pterocarpus santalinus), the tall trees which give one of the world’s finest and rarest woods, growing in these hills makes Seshachalam a hotspot of crime and a hub of mafia.



While the Directorate of Revenue of Intelligence (DRI) is probing to unearth an inter-state syndicate specialising in the illegal cutting and smuggling of red sanders also known as red sandalwood, after recently seizing the protected tree species’ logs worth ₹7.9 crore in Maharashtra, agency sources said that its rich hue and therapeutic properties continue to fuel its high demand across Asia. Last week, the agency seized eight metric tonnes of the wood, foiling the alleged attempt of the syndicate’s attempts to smuggle them out for lucrative returns via concealment.

Rich hue and therapeutic properties of red sanders fuel smuggling attempts
The red sander wood is valued for its use in cosmetics, traditional medicinal products and high-end furniture/ wood craft, the sources said. The export of red sanders from India is prohibited as per the Foreign Trade Policy. The wood’s high demand and price in the international market is apparently the main cause for its illegal felling and smuggling, sources said. “The demand for red sanders exists in countries like China, Japan, Hong Kong, Special Administrative Region of China, Singapore and Myanmar, where they are used for furniture, dyes, making musical instruments as well as medicinal purposes,”


Red sanders (Pterocarpus santalinus) or red sandalwood is an endangered species found only in south India, especially in Andhra Pradesh and at the borders of Andhra Pradesh adjacent to the states of Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Red sanders are a protected species under the CITES convention and the export of the same is prohibited under the Customs Act, of 1962. CITES is a multilateral treaty to protect endangered plants and animals from the threats of international trade. According to sources, it takes 50-60 years for a tree of pole size to reach the 70 cm girth, which is a harvestable girth. “The wood of most Red Sanders trees have a normal grain, however, there is also a rare variant with a ‘wavy’ grain which fetches higher prices in international markets,” a source said.
A part of the recent seizure of the wood by the DRI was made at the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, Nhava Sheva, Navi Mumbai when a container carrying the container was intercepted. The syndicate was attempting to smuggle out red sanders via sea route by mis-declaring it as granite marble slabs, agency sources said. On examination, it was found that six tonnes of red sanders were concealed behind polished granite slabs and cement bricks.
Based on further clues gathered in the case, the agency conducted further searches in Ahmednagar, Nashik and Hyderabad, Telangana. A search was conducted at a godown in Nashik, wherein two metric tonnes of red sanders were seized, which were also supposed to be exported in the coming days. The six metric tonnes of red sanders seized at the Nhava Sheva port were stored and removed for export from the same godown in Nashik. The DRI also intercepted the Import Export Code (IEC) holder and the transporters in the follow-up actions. An IEC is a key business identification number which is mandatory for export from India or import to India.


The agency, in all, nabbed five syndicate members including the exporter, the commission broker, the godown manager and the transporter, who are currently in judicial custody. The agency’s operation against the syndicate began with the receipt of specific information about its plan to smuggle red sanders overseas after which it kept discreet surveillance on its activities. The probe is trying to find out about the purported end-recipients of the consignment that was meant for shipment overseas when it was intercepted.
In a separate case in May 2022, the DRI had recovered 14.63 metric tonnes of red sanders, estimated at ₹11.70 crore in the illicit international markets, from a consignment in Sabarmati, Gujarat, which was to be allegedly exported. The logs were found concealed in an export consignment declared to contain ‘assorted toiletries’. In November 2021, in another case, the DRI recovered 9.98 metric tonnes of red sander wood that was allegedly being smuggled out of India in the guise of export of ‘Iron and Brass Builder Hardware items’.


In line with its commitment to preserve the natural heritage of the nation, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) has recovered 14.63 MT of Red Sanders, estimated at Rs 11.70 crore in the international market, from a consignment that was stuffed at ICD Sabarmati, and which was to be exported to Sharjah, UAE.
Intelligence was developed by DRI that red sanders logs were concealed in an export consignment declared to contain “assorted toiletries”, for being smuggled out of the country. Accordingly, Operation Rakth Chandan was launched and close surveillance was kept on the suspect export consignment.
Acting on the above intelligence, the suspect container was scanned through a ‘container scanning device’ which confirmed the presence of some goods in the shape of logs, and the absence of declared goods i.e. assorted toiletries. Accordingly, the container was examined by DRI, which revealed that it was fully stuffed with wooden logs of red colour that appeared to be Red Sandalwood. On de-stuffing, 840 wooden logs, having total weight of 14.63 MT, were found in the container. No other goods were recovered. Preliminary examination of the wooden logs by Range Forest Officers confirmed that the logs are of Red Sandalwood, which is prohibited for export. Hence, the same were seized under provisions of Customs Act, 1962. Further investigation regarding domestic movement of the goods, their transportation and the exporter concerned is in progress. 
Red Sanders is a flora-species that is endemic to a distinct tract of forests in Eastern Ghats region of Andhra Pradesh and fall under ‘endangered list’ in the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List. Red Sanders is also listed in Appendix-II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wildlife Fauna and Flora (CITES). Its rich hue and therapeutic properties are responsible for its high demand across Asia, particularly China, for use in cosmetics, medicinal products and high-end furniture/woodcraft. The export of Red Sanders from India is prohibited as per the Foreign Trade Policy. 
In the fiscal years 2021-22 and 2020-21, during its operations across the country, DRI seized 95 and 96 MT of Red Sanders respectively, estimated at over Rs. 150 crore in the international market. In March 2022, DRI seized 12.20 MT of Red Sanders wood from a container in CFS, Krishnapatnam that was being smuggled to Malaysia along with cover cargo of sand/cement chips/gravel and miscellaneous household items. In the same month, 11.7 MT of Red Sanders wood was seized at Mundra port, which was being smuggled out of India in the guise of export of “tractor parts”. In December 2021, DRI seized 9.42 MT of Red Sanders that was being smuggled out of India in the guise of export of “cast iron pipes” from ICD Tughlakabad, Delhi.
In Nov-2021, DRI examined an export container lying at ICD Piyala, Haryana resulting in recovery of 9.98 MT of Red Sanders wood that was being smuggled out of India in the guise of export of “Iron & Brass Builder Hardware items”. Immediate follow-up action led to examination of another container at Nhava Sheva port, which resulted in recovery of 12.16 MT of Red Sanders wood. Another container, which had already sailed out of Nhava Sheva port for Sanshui, China, was also recalled from high seas, and its search led to the recovery of 12.03 MT of Red Sanders wood. Thus, a total of 34.17 MT of Red Sanders wood, having estimated value of over Rs. 27 crore in the international market, was seized in a single coordinated operation


Red Sanders Pterocarpus santalinus, or Red Sandalwood, is an endemic tree species with distribution restricted to the Eastern Ghats of India (Arunkumar and Joshi, 2014). It is known as 'Lal Chandan', 'Rakta Chandan' in Hindi (Bhagyaraj, 2017), due to the characteristic red colour of the wood (Lal and Rakta (blood)). Taxonomically, Red Sanders is placed in the Magnoliopsida class, order Fabales, and family Fabaceae. 


Red Sanders is a very slow-growing
tree species that attains maturity in
natural forests after 25 – 40 years. The heartwood of Red Sanders is
known to have the capacity to
accumulate heavy and rare earth
elements such as strontium cadmium,
zinc, and copper. 'Santalin' is a natural dye obtained
from its heartwood and is used in
pharmaceutical preparations, food
articles, leather, and textile industries.


Over harvesting for illegal wildlife trade

Red Sanders is one of India's most
exploited tree species and is under
tremendous pressure from illegal
logging. The heartwood of Red
Sanders is in demand in the domestic
and international market for making furniture, handicrafts
and musical instruments in China and
Japan. The red dye obtained from the wood is
used as a colouring agent in the
textiles, medicine and food industries.
According to the Andhra Pradesh
Forest Department, rampant illegal
logging and smuggling of trees have
been reported in Chittoor, Kadapa,
Nellore & Kurnool districts in Andhra
Pradesh. The CITES Trade Database recorded
28 incidents of Red Sanders
confiscation, seizure, and specimens
from the wild being exported from
India. These consignments were
exported to China (53.5%), Hong Kong
(25.0%), Singapore (17.8%) and the
United States of America (3.5%) from
2016 to 2020. India reported an export
of more than 19,049 tonnes of logs. In
comparison, the importing countries
reported about 4610 tonnes of logs,
127 tonnes of sawn wood, 20 tonnes
of transformed wood and 980 kg of
wood products, clearly indicating a
discrepancy in reporting of Red Sander
trade. China remains the largest
importer with more than 13618 tonnes
of the products, followed by Hong
Kong (5,215 tonnes) and Singapore
(216 tonnes).
Red Sanders
is India’s most
exploited tree
species driven
by both
domestic and
international
demand.

THREATS
The critical threats to Red Sanders is
illegal timber extraction (CITES 1995),
habitat loss and degradation.

Habitat loss and degradation
Anthropogenic pressure from cash crop
farming and grazing by livestock, along
with forest fires in their natural habitat,
threatens the species' Habitat



CONSERVATION EFFORTS
To combat the illegal logging and
smuggling of Red Sanders in Andhra
Pradesh, the State Forest Department
has scaled up its efforts by setting up
check posts at critical locations and
at identified bottlenecks to monitor
their transport via road.
E-surveillance of social media and ecommerce websites has been
intensified, and efforts have been
made to enhance the protection of the
species.
The Andhra Pradesh Forest
Department has implemented the
Preventive Detention (PD) Act against
the smugglers and established two
special courts for prompt trial of the
cases to prevent the smuggling of the
species (Forest Department,
Government of Andhra Pradesh).
In 2016 the Andhra Pradesh Forest Act,
2016 was amended via A.P. Act No.15
of 2016 to give the special status of
protection to Red Sanders. Red
Sanders offences were made
cognisable and non-bailable, and the
punishments related to it was
enhanced. The illegally acquired
properties from Red Sanders are made
liable for forfeiture.
In 2014, Red Sanders Anti-Smuggling
Task Force was formed by the Andhra
Pradesh Forest Department to combat
Red Sanders smuggling. Dedicated
posts in the Police Department, District
Special Parties, Andhra Pradesh
Special Police Platoons and Forest
Department were sanctioned along
with other administrative & ministerial
posts to control the smuggling of Red
Sanders. Since its inception, the Red
Sanders Anti-Smuggling Task Force
has made numerous seizures of Red
Sanders in the State. 

SECURING THE FUTURE
In 2012, the Supreme Court of India
recommended the Central
Government to list Red Sanders as a
protected species in Schedule VI of
the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
However, the species was only
recently enlisted under Schedule IV
through amendment to the Act in
December 2022.
The Red Sanders harbouring forests
within the species' geographical
range should be declared 'High
Conservation Areas' to provide an
adequate legal framework for
protecting the species and its habitat.
Enforcement agencies such as the
Forest Departments, Customs,
Railways, Police, DRI (Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence), and Coast
Guards must coordinate efforts to
curb the Red Sanders trafficking by
sharing information on hotspots and
transit routes and real-time
intelligence related to the Red Sanders
smuggling.
Engaging with the transport
companies to create awareness about
the illicit trade of Red Sanders and
building the capacity of their staff to
identify, respond and report illegal
trade is also essential.
To curb demand, creating awareness
among consumers about the threats
to the species in the wild from illegal trade is also necessary


The theft took place not far from Bangalore City Police Commissioner's office Threatened the security guard with mace sticks Thieves stole sandal wood from MSC apartment Stories The incident took place on 21st and the case came to light late in Vidhana Soudha police station.																								
Francis is cutting fifty percent, tell me there is no problem in the whole, if you see that you are cutting only 50%, we will complete it in 0.01.																								
What do you mean by sustainable agriculture? It has to be done in a short time.																								
Farmers who are born in sandalwood, you can't work crores in agriculture. Farmers don't talk in terms of crores. Times have changed. Every farmer can become a millionaire with just 100 sandalwood plants. Yes, one sandalwood plant can bring at least one lakh income.																								
Sandalwood cultivation course earning three crores per acre Karnataka is the world leader in sandalwood market																								
Eight years, formation takes place in six to eight years, so this is the classification																								
That's what should be done. Now, when it comes, what kind of spray should it be? Hi, Hello, Namaste, Viewers, Welcome to Freedom Swami Kannada YouTube Channel, I am a holy man. Today we introduce you to a rare young farmer. Yes, yes. More																								
What should be done, what is being done, should be told to do by taking training number and in economics, because marketing is done by taking money and getting the price.Economics of Speech																								
Before we had a 30 year old mango plantation in our farm, the mango plantation did not bring that much income, it comes in one year, it is too much, so the farmers of this belt can pay enough attention to it, keep it in rainy season for one three years, four years.																																															
Introducing a crop that is one of the most expensive crops in the world. You can grow this crop in our Karnataka. This crop requires very little water and requires very little maintenance.																								
If crores of crores of rupees sandalwood is being looted in Bangalore University premises, you can ask us whether they have filed a complaint, of course they have filed a complaint but the details of the response to the complaint given by them is wild Veerappa.																								
Gandha Nadi spread the fragrance of sandalwood to the world in Gandha Gudi, the men of Gandha Gudi are betting to increase the vibration of such Gandha Nadi. His name is Ramesh Balun.																								
When Kadugalla Veerappan died, we all sighed and searched all the sandalwood plants in our country, but we heard a news that disturbed our peace.																								
A sandalwood tree in Bannerghatta Biological Park was stolen, as revealed by the operating staff.																								
This is Jogimatti forest sanctuary near Chitradurga city in the border of 10,000 acre area, there are many trees including sandalwood but such a rare forest has lost sight of trees.																								
No, I am sandalwood tarta. Let's see at that time. China and this Mongolian race are living in Japan, Nepal, Burma. There is more awareness about this in my order.																								
I am coming from the clock tree and now I am a retired police officer ten kilometers from my garden Chandanavan that is the name I have given you He is a film producer Kempamma court case and then my classmate Edakal Gudda Chandrasekhar adanna																								
We have to transplant 280 to 300 saplings																								
You may know about the business of sandalwood after watching the movie Puspa. Sandalwood is not as simple as you see, its market is very small, so there is no fear that there will be a lack of demand for it.																								
What is the fear of sandalwood like the fear of thieves? Farmers who wait until the new year comes. When the new year comes, even the harvesters do not sleep. Those who have grown sandalwood for 10 years, if they keep it for two more years, the white harvest will come, but until then.																								
Farmers of five villages of his taluk in Bidar district have been hard at work cultivating sandalwood trees. What else should be cut down the sandalwood trees which have been growing for about ten to fifteen years? Now a new problem has started for the farmers. What is the problem?																								
Good evening to all, today I am proud to have brought you to one of the most famous places in our Karnataka.																								
Hi Indy tell us your opinion about ning bangalore should be done to them																								
There will be a complete video about black wood. It should be used by many people. We will put it in the next video. Let's talk to this farmer. You can see it in the plant now. It has come to Bagalkot district. Now he will give his opinion. When will it start again?																								
Hello everyone Six months seven months when we brought it one half half audi it is almost two feet three feet togari plant hakidivi post pantry cut divi plant how much did we save about 2.5 acres in it 600 sandalwood 200 raktchandan three hundred Mahamathematics																								
There is a Hollywood Hollywood movie. Look, the hill is not in the middle of the hills. Sir, I don't like it until then. Do it. Look, it's been 18 months. Sir, there is a sandalwood house. There is a round hill.																								
One video every day at 9:00 AM Stay tuned for Ayurvedic Panchakarma and Yoga videos for you Subscribe to our channel Like Share Namaste I am Oota Dr. Vidyanagar Davangere Today's topic is an abundant one in Karnataka.																																															
He made his living in agriculture, he grew the sandalwood crop and saw success, now he is a role model for everyone, not only in our state but also abroad, he is fully famous.																								